[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Travel nightmares.
>> Oh, our flight was
cancelled this morning
with basically no notice.
>> David: Delayed,
cancelled, stranded...
Will a Passenger Bill of Rights
always protect you?
>> If it's supposed to be
a passenger charter then
make it for the passengers.
>> David: Canada versus Europe.
If you'd been on the same
plane leaving from Europe,
they would owe you
hundreds of dollars.
>> That's--
that's really annoying.
>> David: We're chasing
the people with power.
If an airline isn't fined when
they break the rules then why
should they follow the rules?
It's fight, or flight time!
This is your Marketplace.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: At the
Toronto airport,
I'm checking in to
check up on airlines.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Passenger
complaints are on the rise
in Canada, so we want to
test your rights on flights.
What's your biggest
beef when flying?
>> Delays.
Been delayed a lot.
Yeah, um...
>> Lost luggage.
>> David: Lost luggage?
>> Yeah.
>> We had our
flight cancelled, yeah.
>> David: Uh-oh.
No matter the airline,
it seems everyone's
had problems.
Have you ever been
delayed on a flight?
>> Yes!
>> All the time.
>> We've been delayed.
>> David: Really?
>> Yeah?
>> David: What?
How long?
>> Hours.
>> David: Hours?!
You ever get
flight delays?
>> Yes, about 40% of the time.
>> David: 40% of the time.
Long delays are a big beef.
Just ask Chris Conrad.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> I'm tired and frustrated
and I just want to get going.
>> David: That's how Chris felt
when her European vacation
was delayed by nearly a day.
She says they didn't board
until one in the morning.
>> David: And still
there's more delay.
>> More delay,
and we sat around,
and we sat around and...
It was a really old rickety kind
of plane and when they tried
to close the door it
wouldn't close properly.
And then we sat
there for a while,
and then they taxied out a bit,
and then they taxied back again.
Well, they said, "Oh,
the original plane was
"broken so we had to get
this other old plane in,
"and they put a new
engine in it, and now
the engine isn't working."
So, they were
trying to fix that.
>> David: That
costs three more hours.
That's a long time.
>> It is.
It is, yeah.
>> David: You must have
been going just stir crazy.
>> I was hungry, and I was
tired, and I was thirsty,
and I just wanted
to go home.
>> David: Air Canada
does send her home...
..in a taxi.
After an overnight delay
her flight is cancelled,
and she's booked to
fly the following night.
Total delay, 22 hours.
>> They should have their
planes in good working order.
They robbed me of an
entire day of my vacation.
I didn't sleep for 48 hours.
I think they owe me at least
half of my air fare back.
>> David: So, she asks for it.
And what did Air Canada give
you in the way of compensation?
>> They offered me 25% off
in undiscounted base fare.
>> David: How much is that?
Well, take away all
the extra fees and the
base fare is just $329.
25% off that?
$82.25.
Not good enough for Chris.
>> It's like a slap in the
face, really, you know?
It's like they--they don't care.
>> David: But they don't
actually owe her anything.
Under the existing rules,
travelers like Chris have
no clear right to compensation
from any Canadian airline.
But there might be
hope in the future...
because the rules
could be changing.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Minister Of Transport,
Marc Garneau.
>> We're here to make sure that
passengers rights are respected.
>> David: Last spring,
he announced a
Passenger Bill of Rights.
>> When Canadians buy an
airline ticket they expect the
airline to keep its
part of the deal.
>> David: He promises it
will make things better.
How much better?
That's what we
intend to find out.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: We're at
the Halifax airport...
Hi, Gabor.
>> Hey, David.
>> David: ..to meet a guy who
knows all about the new rules.
Shall we go chat?
>> Sure.
>> David: Passenger rights
advocate, Gabor Lukacs.
He fights for disrupted
air travelers seeking justice
from any airline.
In the case of Chris,
would the new bill mean that
she would get compensation?
>> Under new bill, she would
not get compensation either.
The bill exonerates airlines
from the obligation to
compensate passengers
when the delay is caused
by mechanical issues.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Mechanical problems
are a common reason for delays
and cancellations.
But here's the thing, even under
minister Garneau's new rules,
passengers like Chris
won't get compensation.
And Lukacs says that's wrong.
>> Airlines should be liable for
compensating passengers in the
event of cancellation, delay,
or overbooking that is somehow
caused by mechanical issues.
That's a no brainer.
That has been the rule in Europe
and I don't see why it should be
any different in Canada.
>> David: So, what are
those European rules?
To find out we've
come to England.
[ British Anthem
"God Save The Queen" Plays ]
>> David: Travelers
here have had a
Passenger Bill of Rights
since 2005.
They're entitled to compensation
when things go wrong,
even when most
mechanical issues are to blame.
But here's the thing
many people don't know.
It was a fight to get those
rights so we're heading to the
north of England to meet
the man behind that fight.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Hi, Coby.
>> Hi, David.
Welcome to Birmingham.
>> David: Yeah, thank you.
I'm David.
Coby Benson calls himself
a flight delay lawyer.
Alright.
Quite a few people here.
>> That's right.
We have a team
of about 20 people.
>> David: His firm's
built a business out of
flight disruptions, helping
clients get the compensation
they're entitled to.
>> There's tens of thousands
of people every single year
who have had their claims
denied by the airlines.
They come to us.
>> David: And one
precedent setting case
put them on the map
when a European carrier
used mechanical malfunction
as a reason to deny a claim,
Coby took it to court.
The airlines' legal
argument didn't fly.
>> The real legal test as
confirmed by the court,
was whether it's out of the
ordinary and quite simply the
court said that these
technical problems are
not out of the ordinary.
>> David: For an airline to
avoid paying they have to prove
the reason for disruption
was extraordinary.
>> Thankfully, we were
successful in arguing that most
technical problems are not
extraordinary and therefore the
airlines have to pay out.
It was a great
victory for us....
It was an enormous battle
against a very large airline.
>> David: So, now as a result,
anyone flying on a European
airline can claim for
most flight disruptions.
Even Canadian airlines have
to follow the same rules when
flying out of Europe.
So, how would that
affect Chris' 22-hour delay?
>> If she was flying from Europe
to Canada, it wouldn't have
mattered which airline she was
on, she would've been covered
under European law, even though
she's not a European citizen,
and then she would've been
entitled to 600 Euros--
>> David: 600 Euros.
That's about $900 Canadian.
That's a lot of money.
>> That's right, it's a lot of
money, and a passenger
only needs to have been
delayed three or maybe four
hours in order to get
that large sum of money.
>> David: We break
that news to Chris.
If you'd been on the same
plane leaving from Europe,
they would owe you
hundreds of dollars.
>> Yeah.
That's--
that's really annoying.
It's--it's not fair.
>> David: Do you have
any words of advice for
Canadian passengers?
>> If they're flying to Europe
make sure you're flying with a
European carrier and you'll be
protected under the very strong
and pro-consumer European law.
>> David: Europeans have
become used to the protection
but don't always realize
that not everyone has it.
In Canada, we don't
have those kind of rules.
>> Yeah, okay.
>> David: Does that
surprise you at all?
>> It does, yeah because...
I kind of think of Canada
as a very, sort of,
consumer rights kind of--
kind of society.
>> So, what circumstances
will they have to compensate
passengers if it's not
mechanical or weather then?
What else is left?
[ Laughter ]
>> What say you
Canadian government?
>> If it's supposed to be
a passenger charter then
make it for the passengers.
[ Speaking French ]
>> David: Okay.
So, there you go.
The Frenchman says that we
in  Canada either should have
a revolution or a strike
to get these rights.
[ Bells Ringing ]
>> David: Gabor Lukacs
is fighting for those rights
in Parliament.
>> For the all too common
event of mechanical malfunction,
the bill proposes to actually
relieve airlines from the
obligation to compensate
passengers for inconvenience.
>> David: He's invited to
share his concerns with a
House Of Commons committee
that's reviewing the bill.
>> We recommend that the
committee amend paragraph
86.11 Sub 1 Sub B to
clarify that in the event of
mechanical malfunctions,
airlines are liable to
compensate passengers
for their inconvenience.
>> David: It's going to be
an uphill fight for Lukacs.
But these passengers
are on his side.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> I mean, they really
should change it.
It holds them accountable
as an airline, right?
>> David: Do you think
you should be entitled
to compensation?
>> Oh, absolutely!
>> Yeah, definitely not
in the best interests of
customers and flyers.
>> David: Time to
get some answers...
..from Marc Garneau,
the man behind the bill.
As it stands now, the bill
does not require airlines to
compensate passengers in the
event of mechanical malfunction.
Why is that?
>> Well, what we
have decided to do,
in some cases if there is an
operational delay in a flight,
for example because the flight
crew was not there to fly it,
or the airline made a change for
operational reasons to maximize
their traffic flow.
>> David: If they cancelled a
flight because it wasn't full?
>> There will be compensation
there because that's something
that is within their control.
It is not a mechanical problem.
>> David: But why is mechanical
not within their control?
>> We do consider it to be
within their control but for
safety reasons, of course,
we don't want them to
take off if there is a problem.
>> David: In Europe they don't
have to choose between safety
and compensation.
They get both.
>> We're putting together
our own Bill of Rights and
I think you're gonna see that
we have a world-leading
class or category
of compensations.
>> David: Let me put
it to you this way,
if you and I get on a plane
and fly to anywhere in Europe,
if there is a delay, a big delay
from a mechanical malfunction
on our way back from Europe,
we do get compensation.
Why should we as air passengers
be treated differently depending
on which direction
we're flying from?
>> I think that we have to,
yes, compensate passengers for
certain things but at the same
time we want to make sure that--
that our airlines can
remain competitive,
so they can keep the
prices as low as possible.
>> David: Some people
feel that airlines have more
protection than passengers.
>> I believe that this is very
balanced and that we are
seriously addressing
the rights of passengers.
>> David: But it is not
enough for this passenger.
>> Well, it makes me wonder
whose side the government is on.
There's no incentive for
them to even have their
planes on time now.
If they had to pay everybody
compensation every time
their planes were delayed or--
I think that would make them
pull their socks up a bit.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Benson agrees that
the rules are a good deterrent.
>> European rules have
encouraged punctuality of
airlines, so the law has acted
as a really good mechanism
to ensure that the airlines
are operating efficiently
and on time.
>> David: How this man took
on a major airline and won.
>> It wasn't about
the money for me.
It was about just
bringing this to light.
>> David: Should a
passenger have to go
to court to get something
that they actually deserve
under the existing rules?
Fighting For Your Flight Rights
continues...
only on your Marketplace.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: It's
fight or flight time.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> Oh, our flight was
cancelled this morning
with basically no notice.
>> David: No matter the airline,
your frustrations with flying
are sky high.
>> There has to be something
that can make some processes
like this a little easier,
a little better.
>> David: It can be a
long fight to get the right
compensation from airlines.
Most of us just give up.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: But not this guy.
He took on Air Canada and won.
>> David: Hey, Dan?
>> Hi, David?
>> David: In Fall River,
Nova Scotia, Dan Lachance's
battle began after a
cross-country journey
to Whitehorse involving
three connecting flights.
>> So, when I got to Vancouver
and boarded the flight for
Whitehorse and we were
just about to take off,
and we were
seated and belted in,
and then I was asked to deplane,
because there was another
passenger that had been
ticketed for that seat.
>> David: And they
come to you and say,
"You gotta get off."
>> Yes, that's exactly
what happened.
It was a shocker.
>> David: Dan was booked
on the next flight which meant
a delay of nine hours.
>> I was not happy
with the situation,
and I wouldn't arrive
there, as it turned out,
till after midnight.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: But he
does have rights.
Air Canada's own rules
say that passengers who
are bumped off a flight,
and then substantially delayed,
get $800 bucks compensation.
>> David: Did you get that $800?
>> No.
>> David: Dan emails
Air Canada asking for the
money and receives this reply.
>> And essentially says
that they sometimes have
to deny boarding.
>> David: Mmm-hmm.
>> And so, as a result,
they would offer a %15 off
the base fare of my next
booking, at aircanada.com.
>> David: He refuses the
discount and takes Air Canada
to small claims court.
That sure gets
their full attention.
They offer to settle.
They say here's the money.
>> Right, but at the same time,
in the same letter, along with
that offer is a declaration that
there's no admission of
any wrongdoing on
Air Canada's part.
That was the trigger.
It wasn't about
the money for me.
It was about just
bringing this to light.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: And so,
he gets his day in court.
But the airline
still won't back down.
>> The big response from
Air Canada was that I wasn't
on the flights that
I said I was on.
>> David: The airline says their
computer showed Dan missed
a connection, so they gave
away his seat to Whitehorse.
But he made all of his flights.
And he could prove it.
>> 'Cause I had receipts
that put me there,
to prove that I was there.
In this case in Vancouver,
I was there for hours prior
to the boarding of
that flight at the gate.
Literally, hours.
>> David: What happened?
>> Uh, eventually we won.
>> David: Dan gets the
money, and his court costs too.
>> Yeah, that was a good moment.
The adjudicator essentially said
that Air Canada wasn't following
its own tariff, wasn't treating
its customers with respect until
they were actually forced by
the hand essentially to do so.
>> David: But you didn't win
this case because they didn't
show you respect, you won
because Air Canada didn't
follow their own rules?
>> Yes.
Yeah, it's all about just
following the rules that
are posted there, and not
trying to get out of it.
>> David: But it's
not just Air Canada.
Other airlines have also fought
back against passenger claims.
So, how do we know carriers will
always follow the new rules?
We tell minister Marc Garneau
about Dan's battle.
Should a passenger have to go
to court to get something that
they actually deserve
under the existing rules?
>> Normally that
should not happen.
I don't expect
passengers going to court.
I think the rules will be very
clear and I have the feeling
that the airlines are
going to cooperate.
>> David: Will you hold
airlines accountable if
they break the rules?
>> Absolutely.
That has always
been the case and the
Canadian Transportation Agency
which is a semi-judicial body
has the power to
impose penalties.
>> The Canadian transportation
agency has failed its mandate.
It has abdicated its
mandate to enforce the law.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: Passenger rights
advocate, Gabor Lukacs,
has lost faith
in the regulator.
He doesn't believe
the CTA will crackdown.
>> From my perspective, we can
have the best possible rules and
laws that you can imagine,
if they are not being enforced
they're all futile.
>> David: He worries airlines
might not pay up because the
CTA hasn't been
dishing out fines.
How many times have you
seen in the past several years,
when an airline has been
found to break their own tariff?
How many times have
they been fined anything?
>> Never.
>> David: Not once?
We check that.
He's right.
At the time of this interview,
not even one fine in the last
five years for breaking
their own rules.
We take that to the minister.
If an airline isn't fined
when they break the rules,
then why should they follow
the rules if all they have to do
is pay the money they
would have paid anyway to
passengers under their tariffs?
>> Well, they will have to
pay compensation if they've
violated a passenger's rights
so that is a penalty that
they will have to pay.
If they refuse to do that then
they can be fined by the CTA
and I'm fully competent--
confident that the CTA
will exercise that power.
>> David: Even though they
haven't used the power to
fine over the past five years?
>> We're talking about
what's ahead of us now.
>> David: Funny enough,
a week after our interview the
CTA announces a huge fine
for Air Transat over this...
>> ...Who called 9-1-1
from this aircraft...
>> David: What does this
change for your flight rights?
So, it's increasing the
amount of time that I should
be stuck on the tarmac for?
>> It is mind boggling why.
It makes no sense to me.
>> David: The Fight For
Your Flight Rights continues.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: The real
deal on your Marketplace.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: New passenger rights
are getting ready for takeoff.
They'll offer you
better protections,
including banning all airlines
from bumping people
off a plane against their will.
>> Oh, my God.
No!
>> David: Like the shocking
example of this man being
dragged off a
United Airlines flight.
>> Oh, my God!
Look at what you did to him!
>> David: And in Canada,
remember those Air Transat
passengers stuck on
the tarmac for six hours?
They already had rights.
>> The person who called
9-1-1 from this aircraft please
present yourself to the
very forward of the aircraft.
>> David: Quite the ordeal.
As a result, the airline gets
that fine, nearly $300,000.
Why?
It broke the rules.
Under the existing rules,
passengers on Canadian airlines
are entitled to refreshments
and the opportunity to get off
if they've been stuck on
the tarmac for 90 minutes
or more so long as it's safe.
But under the proposed
legislation that time would
extend to three hours for all
airlines, doubling it from
just the 90 minutes.
Consumer advocate,
Gabor Lukacs tried to
fight that too.
So, it's increasing the amount
of time that I should be stuck
on the tarmac for?
>> It is mind boggling why.
It makes no sense to me.
>> David: Minister of Transport,
Marc Garneau is sponsoring
the bill.
The buck stops with him.
Why is three hours that
right amount of time?
>> We've looked at other
countries and that is...
a fairly widely accepted norm.
>> David: But if we look
in this country right now,
the protocol of many
airlines is 90 minutes--
>> Only--
>> David: --instead we're
doubling it when we
do the regulations?
>> Only certain airlines
have it and it is--
>> David: For the big ones?
>> --it's an internal rule
that they have in
their contract.
Of course, if an airline
wants to continue to offer
that they can do that.
>> David: What do passengers
think of the proposed change
from 90 minutes to three hours?
What do you think of that?
>> That's way too long
to be stuck on a tarmac.
>> I'm not a fan.
I've got two kids under two
and that would be chaos.
>> I would go stir crazy.
>> You're begging to get
off that plane after two hours.
>> David: Hopefully that
doesn't happen to you today.
Have a good flight.
>> You better not jinx me.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> David: When you take a look
at some of the things that we're
talking about, do you think
there is anything that you
would change now?
>> I am absolutely positive that
Canadians will be very pleased
with this Bill of Rights when
they see it and I would ask
Canadians to be patient.
They'll see it in 2018
and they'll be very
satisfied with it.
And this is something that will
be world leading in terms of
rights compared to
other countries.
[ Bell Chiming ]
>> David: But the
bill is not law yet.
It's still being debated
in the Senate.
Maybe they'll listen to
passengers and advocates.
What do you think?
Send us your thoughts.
And we'll keep watching.
[ ♪♪ ]
>> Asha: It's a
cross border price war.
We're buying for baby.
Weee!
>> All fun and games until
we check the price tags.
>> Wow!
>> Asha: $119.99
>> Yeah.
>> Ahh!
>> Asha: I hear you.
Are Canadians getting gouged?
On your next Marketplace.
[ ♪♪ ]